Multi-Agent Control of Aircraft Wing Stability Under the Flexural Torsion Flutter In this paper we propose a novel approach for preventing the increasing oscillating of an aircraft wings under the fstatic torsion. The paper presents the novel multi agent method for control, assuming in which the wing surface is covered with controlled ’Feathers' on its surface. The theoretical evaluation of the approaches demonstrates its High Ability to Prevent Flexural-Torsion Vibrations of an Aircraft. Our model extends the possibilities For damping the vibrations, which Po-tentially Allows an Increase in Aircraft Speed Without Misgiving of Flutter. The studies show that the main limitations are the time during which the systems are able to Damp vibrations to A Safe Level and Keep them.

Aeroelastic Systems (AFS) are a new class of active control systems. AFS is used to suppress the flexural instability of airframes by actively controlled closed loop action on control surfaces. This approach can lead to substantial weight savings and better efficient and versatile aircraft as described in particularly in [2] and [3]. The concept of ‘active Flexible Wing’ or ‘Active Flexible Airframe’ is considered in order to achieve the desirable dynamic behavior, which is important for flight stability and performance. The idea of applying an active control mechanism, according to where special mechanisms are found on the  wings of the aircraft with the desired dynamic behaviour, has been investigated from the first day of manned flying.

Flutter is a phenomenon in aerodynamics that occurs when the air density of an aircraft increases rapidly. It is caused by the deviation of the wings from their stationary position due to some random reason, such as gust of wind or sudden wing movement. we propose a method for preventing flutter and show that it can be achieved by forming qu and mu.

Wing deflection and angle of attack are the parameters of vibration modes. We show that the wing influence is generally calculated by the formulae f (z) and bij (i), j = 1 and 2 respectively.

we present a control equation for the dynamic system of a feather in a Laminar flow taking into account its aerodynamic forces and moment.

We propose a new approach for the control of wing dynamics in laminar flows, which is based on the concept of non-multi-agent control.

Multi-Agent Control of the Wing with Feathers aimed to Avoid Increased Wing Oscillations When Approaching Flutter. In this work, we present a mathematical Model of the  Bending-Torsional Vibrations of an Airplane Wing with Controlled feathers on Its Surface. We consider three different statement of the control problems, which differby the goal functional. We synthesized three control laws by the Speed Gradient method. The first one is multi-algent. The second one is an intermediate one for the Synthesis of a Multi-agent Control Law.

Adaptive feedback control of multi-input aeroelastic systems with constrained inputs. AIAA Paper 2012-6359, 2011. Afon,R. and Brenner M., ‘Suppressing the Aeroelation/Aerotroservoelusastic Interaction by Adaptative Feedback Control Instead than Notching Filter’ AIAA paper 2011-6458, 2011. [24] L. W. and Singh, N. E., “Active Flight Suppression Using Nonlinear Reduced Input Models” AIAAPap 2013-4744, 2013. [27] Huang, T. H. R., Wu, H. Q., and Zhang, Zhi Jun, “Design of Active Flutter Sensing for High-Dimensional AeroElastic Systems involving Constrained Airflow Inputs”, Chinese Journal of Aviation, Vol. 28, No. 1, February 2014, doi:10.1080/2014-259060.2016.16827676.

Weber, An Unform Approach to Incremental Automatingd Reasoning On Strongly Distributed Structures. Global Conference on Autonomous Reasoning in Strongly Distributioned Structures, Tbiliisi, Gence, October 16-18, 2015, EPIC Series in Computer Computing 21 (EpiC Series) in Computing 21).