Francis Institute of Technology (Engineering College) University of Mumbai 2023-2024 CERTIFICATE This is to certify that the project entitled “AI-Powered Academic Research As- sistant” is a bonafide work of “Daniel Ferreira(Roll no.54), Prem Tatkari(Roll no.56), Divyesh Mistry(Roll no.57) and Kyran Almeida(Roll no.58)” submit- ted to the University of Mumbai in partial fulfillment of the requirement for the award of the degree of B.E. This project report entitled “AI-Powered Academic Research Assistant” by Daniel Ferreira(Roll no.:54), Prem Tatkari(Roll no.:56), Divyesh Mistry(Roll no:57) and Kyran Almeida(Roll no.58) is approved for the degree of B.E. This project report entitled “AI-Powered Academic Research Assistant” by Daniel Ferreira(Roll no.:54), Prem Tatkari(Roll no.:56), Divyesh Mistry(Roll no.57) and Kyran Almeida(Roll no.58) is approved for the degree of B.E. Daniel Ferreira (54) Prem Tatkari (56) Divyesh Mistry (57) Kyran Almeida (58) Date: 31/10/2023 iv Abstract In the ever-expanding landscape of academic research, the demand for efficient and intelligent tools to assist researchers in navigating, comprehending, and syn- thesising vast amounts of information has never been more pressing. Software Specifications: • Operating System: Windows • Backend: Flask • Machine learning model: LongT5 • Frontend: HTML, CSS, Javascript • Editor: Visual Studio Code 7 Chapter 3 System Analysis 3.4 Use-Case Diagrams and Description Figure 3.1: Use-Case Diagram for AI-Powered Academic Research Assistant Use Case Description: The above use case diagram (Figure 3.1) shows the high-level functions and scope of the system. 8 Chapter 4 Analysis Modeling 4.1 Activity Diagram Figure 4.1: Activity diagram for AI-Powered Academic Research Assistant 9 Chapter 4 Analysis Modeling The Activity Diagram 4.1 shows the process of generating a summary and key takeaways from an AI-powered model. 12 Chapter 5 Design 5.1 Architecture Design Figure 5.1: Block Diagram for AI-Powered Academic Research Assistant 13 Chapter 5 Design 5.1.1 Preprocessing the question Tokenization: Split the question into individual words or tokens. [5]Formally, given two sentences Si and S j, with a sentence being repre- sented by the set of Ni words that appear in the sentence: Si = wi 1, wi 2,..., wi Ni, Similarity(Si,S j) = |wk|wk  Si&wk  Sj| log(|Si|)+log(|S j|) (5.1) The score is calculated for all sentences using, Score(s) = d +sum(Score(t)Similarity(s,t)) (5.2) Where, Score(s) is the score of sentence s, d is a damping factor, typically set to 0.85, Score(t) is the score of sentence t, Similarity(s,t) is the similarity between sentences s and t. 15 Chapter 5 Design 5.2.2 GLUE Benchmark GLUE benchmark is a natural language processing (NLP) benchmark that consists of a collection of nine tasks, including text summarization, question answering, and natural language inference. Figure 6.3: Preprocessing 19 Chapter 6 Implementation Figure 6.4: Webscraping 20 Chapter 7 Conclusions 7.1 Conclusion In conclusion, The AI-powered academic research assistant with web scraping capabilities has the potential to be an indispensable tool for researchers, signifi- cantly reducing the time and effort spent on information retrieval, data analysis, and literature review. Thanks to this, the attention allows each token to attend to both nearby tokens like in Local attention, and also every global token like in the case of standard global attention (transient represents the fact the global tokens are constructed dynam- ically within each attention operation). Figure 6.3: Preprocessing 19 Chapter 6 Implementation Figure 6.4: Webscraping 20 Chapter 7 Conclusions 7.1 Conclusion In conclusion, The AI-powered academic research assistant with web scraping capabilities has the potential to be an indispensable tool for researchers, signifi- cantly reducing the time and effort spent on information retrieval, data analysis, and literature review. 7.2 Future Scope The AI-powered academic research assistant with web scraping capabilities holds great potential for further development and integration into the research community. Furthermore, as ethical and privacy concerns related to web scraping are addressed and regulated, this assistant can become a trusted and widely adopted resource for researchers across diverse domains, fostering more efficient and impactful scientific discoveries.